PPA-46
In this chapter:
History and Significance                                                                           01
Pathogens                                                                                                      01
Conditions for Disease Development                                             02
Fungi                                                                                                            02
Oomycetes (Water Molds)                                                                   07
Bacteria                                                                                                       09
Viruses                                                                                                        11
Plant Parasitic Nematodes                                                                   13
Phytoplasmas                                                                                           15
Parasitic Seed Plants                                                                              15
Table of Common Symptoms                                                                 16
Plant Disease Diagnostics                                                                        18
Plant Disease Management                                                                     19
Resources                                                                                                       20
Anyone who has ever planted a garden knows not only the 
rewards of beautiful flowers, fruit, and/or vegetables, but 
also the disappointment when plants become diseased or damaged. Many factors cause plants to exhibit poor vigor, changes in 
appearance, or even death. Both abiotic (non-living) and biotic 
(living) factors can negatively impact plant heath. Disorders 
that result from non-living factors (such as nutrient deficiencies, too much or too little watering, temperature stress, and 
chemical damage) are discussed in subsequent chapters. This 
chapter focuses on those living organisms that cause disease: 
fungi, water molds, bacteria, viruses, nematodes, phytoplasmas, 
and parasitic plants.
History and Significance
Plant loss to homeowners may result in frustration and 
minor monetary cost. However, on a global scale, plant diseases 
cause an estimated $38 billion1 in annual losses. History also 
provides some perspective on the impacts of plant disease.
One of the most notable historical impacts of plant disease 
was caused by late blight of potato. This disease was a major 
contributing factor in the Irish potato famine of 1845. During 
this time, approximately one million people perished from 
starvation; a million and a half more are believed to have left 
Ireland and immigrated to the United States. The late blight 
pathogen is still present in production systems today, but it is 
managed by resistant varieties, sanitation, and fungicides.
Near complete loss of the American chestnut was caused 
by a fungal disease that nearly wiped out forests in the eastern 
United States. The trees once grew to majestic heights within 
their native forest habitat, as well as in urban plantings. They 
provided high-quality hardwood for building construction and 
nuts as a food source for people and wildlife. However, in the 
late 1800s, chestnut blight was accidentally introduced to the 
United States through imported Chinese chestnut trees. While 
Chinese chestnuts are tolerant to the blight, American chestnut 
trees are not, and in less than 40 years, approximately 30 million 
acres of chestnut trees died. Chestnut blight remains a problem, 
and researchers are still seeking options for management.
Disease management changed drastically when the French 
wine industry gave way to the first fungicide, Bordeaux mixture. 
France’s grape production had long been devastated by powdery mildew and downy mildew. Then in 1882, the discovery 
of a copper sulfate and lime mixture helped manage these 
vineyard diseases. Bordeaux mixture is still used in a modified 
form to manage powdery mildew, downy mildew, and other 
fungal diseases on numerous types of plants.
These examples represent situations in which plant diseases 
have reached historical proportions. However, the amount of 
damage that plant diseases cause varies depending upon factors such as environment, host health and susceptibility, and 
pathogen biology. There are many options for managing disease 
development and spread. The effectiveness of management 
techniques begins with proper identification of the disease 
and/or causal organism.
Pathogens
A plant disease is any physiological or structural abnormality that is caused by a living organism. Organisms that cause 
disease are referred to as pathogens, and affected plants are 
referred to as hosts. Many organisms rely on other species for 
sources of nutrients or as a means of survival, but they are not 
always harmful to the host. For example, saprophytic organisms 
obtain nutrients from dead organic material and are a vital 
part of many ecosystems. Plant pathogens, on the other hand, 
utilize hosts for nutrients and/or reproduction at the hosts’ 
expense. Disease-causing organisms include fungi, oomycetes 
(fungus-like organisms called water molds), bacteria, viruses, 
nematodes, phytoplasmas, and parasitic seed plants.
Once a pathogen infects a host, symptoms often develop. 
Symptoms are the outward changes in the physical appearance 
of plants. Symptoms take time to develop, and thus, disease 
By Kimberly Leonberger, plant pathology Extension associate; Kelly Jackson and Robbie Smith, Extension horticulture agents; and 
Nicole Gauthier, Extension plant pathologist.
Plant Diseases
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-2
development may be delayed for several days, weeks, months, or 
even years after initial infection occurs. Examples of symptoms 
include wilt, leaf spots, cankers, rots, and decline.
Physical evidence of pathogens (called signs) may also be 
observed on diseased tissue. Examples of signs include fungal 
fruiting bodies, bacterial ooze, nematode cysts, and fungal 
mycelia. Both symptoms and signs are utilized in making disease diagnoses.
Conditions for Disease Development
Disease development is dependent upon three conditions: 
a susceptible host plant, a favorable environment, and a viable 
pathogen. All three of these factors must be present for disease 
to occur. Figure 5.1 presents this concept as a “disease triangle.” 
Each side of the triangle represents one of these factors: host 
plant, environment, or pathogen. When all three sides of the 
triangle are complete, disease occurs. If one of the conditions 
is not present (one side of the triangle is missing), then disease 
does not occur. By altering the susceptibility of host plants, the 
surrounding environment, and/or the viability of pathogens, 
the disease triangle can be broken and disease development 
prevented.
Host plant genetic makeup determines its susceptibility to 
disease. This susceptibility depends upon various physical and 
biochemical factors within the plant. A plant’s stature, growth 
habit, cuticle thickness (a protective outer layer on plant tissues), and shape of stomata (small openings that allow water, 
oxygen, and carbon dioxide in and out of plant tissues) are a 
few physical factors that influence disease development. Plants 
may also produce biochemical compounds that limit or prevent 
colonization or infection. Growth stage and ability to deter 
pathogens can also impact plant susceptibility to disease. For 
example, young leaves are often more susceptible to infection 
than mature leaves.
Environment plays an important role in disease development. Pathogens generally require specific environmental 
conditions for infection and spread. Most plant pathogens 
require high humidity and moderate temperatures. Other 
pathogens, such as bacteria and water molds, require surface 
water for spread. In some disease cycles, environmental conditions influence the development of symptoms. For example, 
extreme temperatures or drought can cause plant stress; this 
loss of vigor can increase host susceptibility to both infection 
and disease development. Other environmental factors affecting disease can include those resulting from planting and maintenance practices. For example, high-density plantings can have 
higher relative humidity, while overhead watering increases leaf 
surface moisture needed by pathogens to infect plant leaves.
Pathogens must be present and viable in order to infect 
plants and cause disease. Removal of infected plant parts and 
other remnants of pathogens makes them unavailable for infection. Fungicides also reduce amounts of inoculum (infective 
propagules) available for infection. Many pathogens, however, 
have developed specialized structures that ensure survival during adverse conditions. For example, several water molds and 
fungi are capable of surviving in soil for many years until conditions are favorable for infection. Pathogens may also survive 
winter temperatures and other harsh conditions in infected 
plant tissue. If a susceptible host and favorable environment 
are not available, some pathogens can assume a dormant state 
for many years.
Fungi
Fungi are the most abundant group of plant pathogens. There 
are thousands of fungi capable of causing plant diseases. These 
multicellular organisms are typically microscopic. The body of 
a fungus is composed of filament-like threads called hyphae. 
Masses of hyphae are called mycelia. When large enough, these 
masses can be seen without the aid of a microscope. Powdery 
mildew is one example of a disease in which fungal mycelia 
are visible.
Fungi reproduce via spores, which can be produced sexually 
or asexually. Spores vary in color, shape, size, and function, and 
this variation can often be used by diagnosticians as a means to 
identify pathogens. Some fungi produce spores within sexual 
fruiting structures (ascocarps, pustules, mushrooms) or asexual 
fruiting structures (pycnidia, acervuli). While many of these 
fruiting structures are small and may require the aid of a microscope, some (such as mushrooms or rust pustules) can be seen 
with the naked eye. Other types of fungi produce exposed or 
unprotected spores that are not enclosed in structures. These 
spore types are more sensitive to environmental conditions 
than enclosed spores.
Once a fungal spore makes contact with a plant surface, it 
germinates, much like a seed, as long as conditions are favorable for the pathogen. Hyphae emerge from spores and are 
Figure 5.1. Disease Triangle—Plant disease results when there is a capable of infecting plants via natural plant openings (such 
susceptible host, viable pathogen, and favorable environment.
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-3
as stomata), through wounds, or by direct penetration of the 
plant epidermis. Upon infection, fungi utilize nutrients from 
their hosts. Many fungi produce additional spores as they grow, 
which aids in the spread of the pathogen.
Spores or mycelial fragments (these infective units are 
referred to as propagules) can be spread via wind, water, soil, 
insects, animals, and humans. Fungi spread not only from plant 
to plant, but also within a single plant. Fungi may spread through 
a single plant as a systemic infection by utilizing the vascular 
Figure 5.2. Septoria leaf spot of tomato is a disease familiar to many gardeners. Spores survive winter on infected plant debris (2a) and weed 
hosts. In spring, when temperatures are favorable, rain splashes spores (2b) onto new plant growth where infection occurs. Small circular lesions 
develop on leaves (2c), petioles, and stems. This pathogen is not known to infect fruit. Symptoms first develop on lower plant parts where 
humidity is high and the first splashed spores land. As the season progresses the fungus produces additional spores, which are splashed by 
water further up plants. Severely infected plants may exhibit necrosis and defoliation (2d).
system or by splashing spores that result in multiple infection 
sites on multiple plant tissues.
Common symptoms caused by fungi include leaf spots, 
wilts, blights, cankers, fruit rots, and dieback. For additional 
information on symptoms that can result from fungal infections, 
refer to Table 5.1. Fungi cause a wide range of diseases including Septoria leaf spot, powdery mildew, cedar-apple rust, and 
Armillaria root rot. Life cycles of these diseases are presented 
in Figures 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5 respectively.
2a
2b 2c
2d
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-4
Figure 5.3. Powdery mildew is a common disease that is known to infect numerous landscape and garden plants. Spores of this fungal pathogen survive winter on infected plant debris or woody tissue (3a). In spring, when temperatures are favorable, rain splashes spores (3b) from leaf 
litter onto new plant growth where infection occurs. Throughout the season the fungus produces additional spores (3c) causing subsequent 
infections. The result is a white powdery plant (3d) that may exhibit early defoliation.
3a 3b
3c
3d
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-5
Figure 5.4. Cedar-apple rust is caused by a unique group of fungi known as rusts. Many rust pathogens require multiple hosts to complete their 
life cycles. In the case of cedar-apple rust, the pathogen overwinters as galls on juniper (4a). Once spring rains begin, galls produce slimy “horns” 
comprised of spores (4b). These spores infect leaves and fruit of apple (and related hosts) (4c). In late summer, apple lesions produce another 
spore type that infects juniper (4d).
4a 4b
4c 4d
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-6
Figure 5.5. Recently transplanted and older stressed trees are susceptible to Armillaria root rot (also called shoestring rot). These fungal pathogens survive in dead wood and roots, as well as soil. Infection occurs in the roots or base of the tree via rhizomorphs (cord-like strands of fungal 
hyphae) (5a). If bark is removed from infected trees, a white mycelial growth may be observed (5b). During rainy weather, pale brown mushrooms 
may develop at bases of infected trees or along dead or dying surface roots (5c). Severely diseased plants exhibit decline or even death (5d).
5a 5b
5c 5d
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-7
Oomycetes (Water Molds)
As the name implies, water is essential for survival, reproduction, infection, and spread of oomycetes (commonly called 
water molds). Water molds were once considered true fungi, 
but they are now classified as fungus-like organisms. Water 
molds and fungi are similar in appearance, as the body is composed of hyphae that mass together to form mycelia. Downy 
mildew is an example of a disease with visible oomycete mycelia.
Reproduction by water molds may be via sexual or asexual 
spores. Asexually produced spores (zoospores) have the ability 
to move in water using tail-like structures (flagella) that propel 
them, a trait not associated with true fungi. Zoospores develop 
within capsules (sporangia) under specific environmental conditions. Sporulation can occur numerous times per growing 
season, as long as water is available. In contrast, sexual spores 
of water molds are typically produced prior to dormancy in 
response to environmental stress. They serve as a means for 
survival under adverse conditions. Spores of water molds 
Figure 5.6. Downy mildew is a common disease that is known to infect numerous landscape and garden plants, including cucumber. Most water 
mold pathogens are host-specific. Spores (6a) of the cucurbit downy mildew pathogen are windblown north each year from overwintering sites 
in the southern United States Soon after infection, yellow, angular leaf spots develop (6b). Spores are produced on the undersides of leaves (6c); 
spores are spread to new tissue via water/rain. Defoliation may occur on severely infected plants (6d). The cucurbit downy mildew pathogen 
cannot survive winter in Kentucky because it requires living plant tissue, and it is not known to produce overwintering spores outside of laboratory conditions. Other downy mildew pathogens can overwinter on leaf debris in Kentucky.
6a 6b
6c
6d
are microscopic, but their examination is essential for proper 
species identification.
Water molds infect in the same ways as true fungi by entering 
through natural plant openings or by direct penetration into 
plant tissues. Once infection occurs, water mold pathogens continue to grow and produce additional spores for new infections.
Infective propagules are spread via water, soil, and infected 
plants and weeds, as well as by wind and wind-driven rain. 
Survival structures produced by water mold pathogens have 
the ability to persist in water and soil for several years.
Common symptoms caused by water molds include leaf 
spots, blights, cankers, root rots, wilt, dampingoff, and dieback. 
For additional information on symptoms that can result from 
water mold infections, see Table 5.1. Two common diseases 
caused by water molds are downy mildew and late blight. 
Life cycles of these diseases are presented in Figures 5.6 and 
5.7, respectively.
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-8
Figure 5.7. Late blight is a disease of solanaceous crops, primarily potato and tomato. The pathogen most commonly overwinters in the southern United States in infected plant or weed tissue. In spring, overwintering spores are windblown north from these southern sites. Once infection 
occurs, water-soaked, grey-brown lesions may develop on leaves (7a), petioles, stems, and/or fruit (7b). Defoliation follows (7c). Potato tubers 
(7d) may become infected via systemic infections or by spores washed into soil.
7a 7b
7d
7c
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-9
Figure 5.8. Bacterial wilt is a disease of cucumber, melons, and pumpkin. Bacterial cells overwinter in striped and spotted cucumber beetles, 
which transmit the pathogen during the growing season (8a). When insects feed on plant tissue, bacteria in their feces are deposited near 
feeding wounds. Infected plants wilt (8b) when large numbers of bacterial cells block water movement. Feeding beetles obtain bacterial cells 
from infected plants and move them to new portions of plants or to new plants. Bacteria continue to reproduce and move throughout plants, 
eventually resulting in plant death (8c). Bacterial ooze can be observed by cutting vines, holding the two cut ends together for 5 seconds, and 
then slowly pulling them apart again (8d).
8a
8c
8b
8d
Bacteria
Bacteria are microscopic organisms typically composed of 
single cells. About 200 types of bacteria are known to cause 
plant diseases. Due to their small size, a high-magnification 
microscope is required to observe bacteria. Occasionally, when 
a large number of cells are present, plants may be observed 
“oozing” bacteria and other organic byproducts.
Bacteria are capable of rapid reproduction through a process 
known as binary fission. In this process, one cell divides to 
become two, then two divide to become four cells, and so on. 
Within a few hours, one bacterial cell can become thousands, 
and under ideal conditions, populations can double in as little 
as 20 minutes.
Unlike fungi and water molds, bacteria are not able to penetrate plant tissue directly. They must infect via wounds or 
natural plant openings such as stomata. Free water is required 
for infection. Once inside plants, bacteria begin to reproduce 
immediately. Some types of bacteria produce toxins or enzymes 
that degrade plant tissue, and the tissue is then utilized as a food 
source. Some bacteria can colonize vascular systems of plants, 
which results in restriction of water movement.
Bacteria spread by water/splashing rain, wind, or insects and 
then move across plant tissues in surface water to reach wounds 
or natural openings. Some can survive for five or more years in 
soil, as well as in plant debris and cankers.
Common symptoms caused by bacteria include leaf spots, 
blights, cankers, galls, wilt, dieback, and soft rots. For additional information on symptoms that can result from bacterial 
infections, refer to Table 5.1. Two common diseases caused by 
bacteria are bacterial wilt and fire blight. Life cycles of these 
diseases are presented in Figures 5.8 and 5.9, respectively.
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-10
Figure 5.9. Certain apple cultivars and other pome fruit are susceptible to a bacterial disease called fire blight. The pathogen overwinters in cankers and other diseased or dying wood (9a). In spring, bacterial cells are transported from cankers to blossoms by wind and rain or by pollinating insects. This first phase of disease is called the blossom blight phase (9b). Blossom and spur infections move through woody tissue to form 
cankers (9c). Rain, wind, and insects later carry bacterial cells from infected blossoms to actively growing shoots, causing shoot blight (9d). As 
weather cools and active plant growth stops, bacteria become dormant until warm rainy weather returns (often the following spring). Over many 
seasons, bacteria can spread throughout trees, resulting in branch or trunk girdling and eventual plant death.
9a 9b
9c 9d
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-11
Viruses
Viruses are extremely small particles that require magnification of 100,000 times or more for observation. This can only 
be achieved with specialized equipment, such as an electron 
microscope. Diseases caused by viruses are often named for the 
first host plant for which symptoms were reported and/or the 
most common symptom. An example is tobacco mosaic virus; 
this virus was first reported as a mosaic symptom on tobacco. 
However, this disease is known to infect more than 100 plant 
species, including many vegetable and ornamental plants.
Once viruses enter host cells, they “hijack” plants and 
“instruct” cells to produce more virus particles. As plant cells 
are converted from their normal function and processes (such 
as cell division or chlorophyll production), changes in plant 
growth and development may be observed.
Plant viruses do not move in and out of plant tissue as 
readily as fungal and bacterial pathogens. They require vectors (such as insects or humans) to carry them from one plant 
to another. After entry into plant cells, reproduction begins. 
Viruses spread throughout plant hosts, infecting all plant parts 
(systemic infection). Viruses are dependent upon live hosts 
for replication, thus disease progresses slowly. Virus-infected 
Figure 5.10. Most cultivated roses are susceptible to rose rosette virus. This virus is vectored by a microscopic rose leaf curl mite (10a). These 
mites move from plant to plant in wind currents, via other insects, or by crawling to adjacent plants. Symptoms, which may develop months or 
years after infection, can include short internodes (called witches’ broom), strapping and reddening of leaf and stem tissue (10b), and excessive 
thorn development (10c). Infected plants that remain in the landscape (10d) serve as inoculum and sources of vectoring mites. When removing 
infected plants, dig out all roots and destroy all plant parts.
10a 10b 10c
10d
plants often survive for many years before they die, as rapid 
plant death would be detrimental to a pathogen that depends 
upon its host for replication.
Insect vectors are a common means for virus spread. 
Numerous insects are capable of acquiring virus particles while 
feeding on infected plants. These particles are transferred to 
new plants or plant parts during subsequent feedings. Some 
virus particles can enter an insect’s gut, where the virus may 
persist and replicate throughout the insect’s life. Other types of 
particles are only carried for short periods inside probing insect 
mouthparts. Insects are capable of transmitting viruses multiple times throughout the season. Viruses can also spread by 
infected seed or pollen, nematodes, humans, animals, or tools. 
A few viruses with very stable structures can remain viable in 
dormant plant tissue and on nonliving materials, which can 
serve as inoculum for future infections.
Common symptoms caused by viruses include mottling, 
mosaic, leaf distortion, stunting, poor fruit set, and chlorosis. 
For additional information on symptoms that can result from 
virus infections, see Table 5.1. Two common viral diseases are 
rose rosette and tomato spotted wilt. Life cycles of these diseases 
are presented in Figures 5.10 and 5.11, respectively.
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-12
Figure 5.11. Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) is known to infect thousands of different plant species. Virus particles are vectored by thrips, 
which acquire the virus while feeding during the larval stage (11a). TSWV can replicate within insect hosts and persist throughout an insect’s life.
Once infected, plants such as tomatoes may exhibit symptoms of wilting and ringspots on leaves (11b), lesions on stems (11c), and mottling or 
ringspots on fruit (11d). Multiple generations of thrips occur each season, and infected weedy hosts contribute to virus spread.
11a 11b
11c 11d
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-13
Plant Parasitic Nematodes
Plant parasitic nematodes are microscopic roundworms 
that primarily infect roots, but a few occur in foliar portions of 
plants. While there are many species of nematodes, only a few 
are known to parasitize plants. All plant parasitic nematodes 
have needle-like mouthparts (stylets) that are used to pierce 
plant tissues and extract cell contents. Nematodes reproduce 
via eggs that result from either the mating of a male and a female 
or by the female alone.
Symptom development occurs as a result of extracted cellular contents or other plant damage. Nematodes may remain 
on the exterior of roots during feeding (stubby-root nematode) 
or penetrate plant tissues completely to feed while inside plants 
(dagger nematode). Nematodes may select a single feeding site 
or feed in multiple locations. Long-distance spread is achieved 
via movement of infested soil, floodwater, or plant material; 
nematodes are only capable of moving very short distances 
on their own.
Common symptoms caused by nematode feeding include 
chlorosis, root galls, damaged or stubby roots, stunting, dieback, and reduced yields. Some heavily infested herbaceous 
plants develop symptoms similar to nutrient deficiencies as 
a result of root loss. For additional information on symptoms 
that can result from nematode infestations, refer to Table 5.1. 
Two common plant parasitic nematodes include soybean cyst 
nematode and foliar nematode. Life cycles of these organisms 
are presented in Figures 5.12 and 5.13, respectively.
Figure 5.12. Soybean cyst nematode juvenile nematodes (12a) infect plants by penetrating root tissue. Males feed for a short time before moving on to another feeding site. Females remain at the same feeding site and expand to encyst egg masses. These lemon-shaped females are white 
or yellow, but they become brown as they mature and die (12b). The dead female bodies are known as cysts; each cyst contains several hundred 
eggs. Cysts protect eggs from adverse conditions, such as heat and drought. When conditions are favorable for nematode development, cysts 
burst open and release eggs (12c). Soybean plants may not exhibit any aboveground symptoms other than poor vigor and/or yield loss (12d).
12a 12b
12c 12d
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-14
Figure 5.13. Foliar nematodes can infect numerous plant species, including anemone. Adult nematodes (13a) survive winter in plant crowns or 
leaf debris. In spring, foliar nematodes move upward via splashing water. Once adults reach leaves (13b), they enter through stomata and begin 
feeding. Eggs (13c) are produced within leaves, where they hatch, molt, and begin to feed. Infected leaf cells are varying shades of green that 
turn brown and necrotic (13d) as cell contents are consumed.
13a 13b
13c
13d
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-15
Phytoplasmas
Phytoplasmas are extremely small, bacteria-like plant pathogens. While they are similar to bacteria, phytoplasmas differ 
in their inability to survive without a host, their smaller size, 
and their lack of cell walls. Phytoplasmas rely on insect vectors, such as leafhoppers, for transmission into hosts. During 
feeding, leafhoppers acquire phytoplasmas from infected host 
phloem (nutrient-conducting vascular system) and introduce 
them into healthy tissue. Once in the phloem, phytoplasmas 
are capable of reproducing and spreading throughout plants, 
which results in systemic infections. Phytoplasmas persist 
within their insect vectors, making this the main method of 
spread for these pathogens.
Common symptoms caused by phytoplasmas are virescence 
(development of chlorophyll in tissues where it is normally 
absent) and abnormal growth such as a “witches’ broom” 
symptom. The most common disease caused by a phytoplasma 
is aster yellows. The symptoms of this disease are depicted 
in Figure 5.14.
Parasitic Seed Plants
Parasitic seed plants share many common characteristics 
with true plants, such as their ability to reproduce and spread 
by seeds. Like other plants, seeds are disseminated via wind, 
water, and animals. However, parasitic plants lack the ability to 
produce all of the nutrients or water they require, so they rely 
on host plants. In some cases, parasitic plants have developed 
modified structures, such as haustoria, that allow them to 
penetrate host plants and obtain nutrients and water. Common 
symptoms caused by parasitic plants are reduced vigor and 
dieback. The most common parasitic plant is mistletoe, shown 
in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.14. Aster yellows, which is caused by a phytoplasma, is 
a common disease of purple cone flower. Infected plants exhibit 
symptoms such as stunting, abnormal growth, sterile flowers, and 
virescence in flowers.
Figure 5.15. Mistletoe often parasitizes oaks and other forest trees.
It produces large clumps of foliage on host plant branches. Mistletoe 
does not produce roots and is reliant upon hosts for water and 
nutrients. In Kentucky, infected host plants do not suffer major damage or stress. In locations where other mistletoe species are present, 
extensive damage to the host may occur.
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-16
Table 5.1. The most common symptoms associated with each pathogen group.
Symptom Description
Plant Pathogen Groups
Fungi Water 
molds Bacteria Viruses Nematodes Phytoplasmas Parasitic 
plants
Blight
Rapid discoloration, 
wilting and death of 
plant tissue
X X X
Blotch
Blotch or large spot 
on leaves, shoots, 
or fruit
X X
Bronzing
Leaves or needles 
develop a bronze 
color
X X
Canker
Dead region on 
bark of twigs, 
stems, or trunks, 
often discolored 
and either raised or 
sunken
X X X
Chlorosis
An abnormal 
yellowing of plant 
parts
X X X X X
Dampingoff
Decay of seeds 
in soil or young 
seedlings shortly 
after emergence
X X
Decline
Gradual, often 
uniform, decline of 
plant health or death 
of plant tissue
X X X X X X
Dieback
Progressive death 
of shoots, branches, 
or roots, generally 
starting at tips
X X X X X
Distortion Irregularly shaped 
plant parts X X X X X
Flagging
Decline of a shoot or 
branch, while nearby 
branches remain 
healthy
X X X
Gall
Abnormal, localized 
swelling on leaf, 
stem, or root tissue
X X X
Gummosis
Production of a 
sticky gum that is 
exuded by the plant
X X X
Leaf spot
Lesion on a leaf, 
which may vary in 
color, shape, and size
X X X X
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-17
Table 5.1. The most common symptoms associated with each pathogen group (continued).
Symptom Description
Plant Pathogen Groups
Fungi Water 
molds Bacteria Viruses Nematodes Phytoplasmas Parasitic 
plants
Mosaic
Nonuniform foliage 
coloration, normally 
an intermingling 
of green color 
variations and 
yellowish patches
X
Mottle Irregular pattern of 
light and dark areas X
Mummy Hard, dried, diseased 
fruit X
Necrosis Death of plant tissue X X X
Ring spot
A lesion with a 
dark outer ring and 
lighter center
X
Rot Decomposition and 
destruction of tissue X X X
Rugose
Wrinkled 
appearance to plant 
tissue
X X
Russet
Yellowish-brown or 
reddish-brown scar 
tissue on a fruit’s 
surface
X
Scab Crust-like disease 
lesion X X
Scorch
Browning and 
necrosis of leaf 
margins
X X X
Shot-hole
Lesions where 
centers have fallen 
out
X X
Stunting
Reduced growth of 
a plant, where plant 
or plant parts are 
smaller than normal
X X X X X
Tip blight Death of tissue at 
the tip of a shoot X X
Vein clearing Leaf veins become 
yellow or clear X
Watersoaking
Wet, dark, or greasy 
lesions, usually 
sunken and/or 
translucent
X X X
Wilt Drooping of leaves 
or other plant parts X X X X
Witches’ broom Abnormal brush-like 
shoot development X X X
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
5-18
Plant Disease Diagnostics
Plant disease diagnostics begins with the observation of 
both the symptomatic plant(s) and surrounding environment. 
Sometimes the cause of plant problems is evident: wildlife 
damage, insect feeding, or mechanical injury. However, a wide 
range of abiotic and biotic factors can cause disease or diseaselike symptoms. Basic plant diagnostics and differentiation 
between biotic and abiotic problems are discussed in Chapter 
6, Diagnosing Plant Problems. Plant disease diagnostics are 
covered in this section.
There are several steps to disease diagnostics, including 
evaluation of vital site information and examination of diseased tissue. Since the majority of plant pathogens cannot be 
seen without the aid of a microscope, it may not be possible to 
confirm disease agents by visual assessment alone. In order to 
diagnose plant problems, it may be necessary to submit samples 
of symptomatic plants to a university or commercial laboratory 
for further analysis.
Even though it may not always be possible to diagnose plant 
diseases by symptoms alone, the following strategies can be 
used to determine whether an infectious agent is the cause of 
disease symptoms. In addition, detailed site and plant information can lead to a more complete diagnosis.
Know the Host Plant(s)
A single plant species can have numerous cultivars or varieties, with many different colors, shapes, patterns, textures, and 
sizes. Occasionally, diversity or variation in plant appearance 
can be mistaken for disease. The difference between normal 
growth and appearance and abnormal appearance can indicate 
whether a problem is present. Furthermore, disease symptoms 
may differ with plant species or cultivar. Some species and/or 
cultivars may be more susceptible or tolerant to disease than 
others. Host information can be critical for diagnosis.
Document Plant Part(s) Affected
In some cases, symptoms develop on plant parts that are 
different from infected tissue. For example, dieback and wilting 
seem to indicate problems in the plant canopy. However, a root 
rot pathogen or bacterial colonization of vascular tissue may 
cause similar symptoms. It is important to examine all aboveand belowground portions of plants to determine potential 
infection site or symptom origin. Digging or cutting into plant 
tissue may sometimes be necessary to fully understand the 
extent of parts affected.
Check for Symptoms and Signs
The presence of symptoms often indicates some sort of 
plant problem. A wide range of symptoms can be expressed 
by diseased plants. Appendix A (separate document) presents common diseases and symptoms of woody ornamentals, 
bedding plants, fruits, vegetables, and turfgrasses. However, 
multiple pathogen groups can cause similar symptoms (Table 
5.1). This is further complicated when abiotic factors induce 
disease-like symptoms. For example, fungi and bacteria can 
cause leaf spots that are similar to those caused by herbicides 
and ozone. Plant disease diagnoses, therefore, cannot be based 
upon symptoms alone. Identification of signs (mycelial growth, 
fruiting structures, and bacterial cells) with a hand lens or 
microscope is required to confirm diagnoses. Often, a trained 
diagnostician can assist with this task.
Examine the Site
Examine the area around plants for additional clues as to 
the cause of plant problems. This is particularly important 
with abiotic problems. Information regarding soil makeup and 
disturbances, as well as soil compaction and drainage patterns, 
can assist in differentiating abiotic maladies from diseases. 
Additionally, examination of surrounding plants can provide 
vital information regarding disease spread. Patterns of injury 
or symptoms can give clues as to whether variety- or speciesspecific infections are possible, or whether a more expansive 
problem exists.
Ask Questions
Ask questions and collect additional information that is critical in making diagnoses. More information can lead to a more 
accurate diagnoses. Consider these site specifics:
• Planting date and practices
• Irrigation practices
• Fertilization
• Symptom development
• Weather conditions
• Site disturbances
• Traffic or pedestrians
• Pet and livestock habits
• Herbicide applications (dates applied in relation to when 
symptoms were observed)
Diagnosis
After collection of site information and analysis of the 
symptomatic plant(s), it may be possible to diagnose some 
plant problems at this stage. However, if the cause cannot be 
determined, it may be necessary to submit symptomatic plant 
samples to a diagnostic laboratory. Contact a county Extension 
agent regarding appropriate steps for selecting and submitting 
samples to the University of Kentucky Plant Disease Diagnostic 
Laboratories. The University of Kentucky Plant Pathology 
fact sheet, Submitting Plant Specimens for Disease Diagnosis 
(PPFSGEN-09), provides helpful information for collecting 
appropriate samples.
Plant Diseases CHAPTER 05
5-19
Plant Disease Management
Disease management begins with accurate diagnoses. 
Diseases can only be managed once they are correctly identified. 
The best management practice is to avoid disease altogether. 
While disease prevention is not always possible, there are often 
recommended management practices that can be used to limit 
disease spread and subsequent infections.
Principles of Plant Disease Management
There are five principles to disease management that focus 
on prevention and limit of disease spread. These techniques 
are most effective in combination.
Exclusion
• Definition: Prevent pathogen introductions to areas where 
they do not currently exist.
• Common Practices: Quarantine, inspection, and certified 
disease-free plant material.
Avoidance
• Definition: Inhibit establishment of pathogens that exist in 
other areas.
• Common Practices: Use certified disease-free plants or seed, 
inspect plants before purchase or installation, reduce plant 
stresses, rotate crops, and avoid wounding.
Resistance
• Definition: Select plants with increased tolerance to 
pathogen(s).
• Common Practices: Select seeds or plants with resistance to 
common pathogens. Consult a county Extension agent or 
reliable source for information on resistant cultivars.
Protection
• Definition: Implement steps to protect plants from infections.
• Common Practices: Modify environment to prevent pathogen infections, remove alternate hosts, apply physical barriers, 
use biological or fungicide treatments.
Eradication
• Definition: Limit pathogen spread once a plant is infected.
• Common Practices: Remove infected plant portions, remove 
(rogue) entire herbaceous plants including roots, practice 
sanitation, use fungicide applications to minimize inoculum 
(fungicides do not cure disease or eradicate pathogens).
Important Plant Disease Management Practices
Once plant disease is confirmed, sanitation is the most 
important management practice in the garden. However, 
homeowners and growers should implement sanitation practices throughout the growing season to prevent and limit plant 
disease development. Infected plants and plant parts (leaves, 
stems, branches, roots, and fruit) should be removed since 
many pathogens overwinter in plant debris. Throughout the 
growing season, including senescence and dormancy, all plant 
debris should be gathered and destroyed by burning, burying, 
or putting in the trash. Composting diseased plant material is not advised, as most home compost bins do not reach 
temperatures high enough to kill plant pathogens. Sanitation 
practices also assist in increasing the effectiveness of other 
management techniques.
Healthy, stress-free plants are less likely to become diseased. 
Maintain plant vigor and avoid stress with proper site selection 
and nutritional balance; this significantly decreases the likelihood of infections. Select plants with resistance or tolerance 
to common diseases, when available. Never save seeds from 
diseased fruit or vegetables.
Fungicides can be effective in protecting plants from infection or limiting spread. Although the term “fungicide” is often 
used as a broad term, products are usually pathogen-specific. 
True fungicides are used to manage fungal pathogens; other 
products are specific to water mold pathogens. Bactericides/
antibiotics are used to manage bacterial pathogens. All of these 
products are suppressive, but only a few have curative effects. 
Fungicide applications will not reverse disease symptoms or 
save plants from death if disease is severe. Always follow label 
directions when applying fungicides. For up-to-date information regarding fungicide use and recommendations, consult a 
county Extension agent.
Summary
Plant diseases can be caused by fungi, water molds, bacteria, viruses, nematodes, phytoplasmas, or parasitic plants. 
Understanding the biology and symptoms common to these 
plant pathogens will aid in identification and management of 
disease problems. Once a disease is properly diagnosed, management options can be deployed to mitigate disease impact.
Appendix
Common diseases and symptoms of woody ornamentals, 
bedding plants, fruits, vegetables, turfgrass, and grains can be 
found in the Appendix A document at:
https://plantpathology.ca.uky.edu/files/mg_ch6_appendix.pdf
CHAPTER 05 Plant Diseases
Resources
University of Kentucky Department of Plant Pathology 
Publications 
https://plantpathology.ca.uky.edu/extension/publications
Submitting Plant Specimens for Disease Diagnosis
http://plantpathology.ca.uky.edu/files/ppfs-gen-09.pdf
American Phytopathological Society Introductory Materials 
https://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/resources/Pages/
Introductory.aspx
American Phytopathological Society Glossary 
https://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/resources/illglossary/Pages/
default.aspx
1The Future World Food Situation and the Role of Plant 
Diseases, Dr. Per Pinstrup-Andersen https://www.apsnet.
org/edcenter/apsnetfeatures/Pages/WorldFoodSituation.
aspx
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge and thank the following University of Kentucky contributors: Amanda Sears 
and Andy Rideout, Extension horticulture agents, for feedback 
regarding drafts of this chapter; and Dr. Emily Pfeufer, Extension 
plant pathologist; Julie Beale and Brenda Kennedy, plant disease 
diagnosticians; and Cheryl Kaiser, Extension staff associate, for 
editorial and composition contributions.
Photo Credits
California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo
Gerald Holmes, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.11C-D
Colorado State University
Whitney Cranshaw, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.14
William Jacobi, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.5B
Cornell University
Karen Snover-Clift, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.13B
Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
Florida Division of Plant Industry, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.5D
Leiden University
Mohammad Mirnezhad – Fig. 5.11A
Swiss Federal Research Station for Agroecology and 
Agriculture
Agroscope FAL Reckenholz, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.12A
University of Delaware
Tracy Wootten, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.10A
University of Georgia
University of Georgia Plant Pathology, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.3A
University of Hamburg
Ulrich Zunke, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.13C
University of Kentucky
Paul Bachi – Fig. 5.2A-B, 5.4D, 5.6A, 5.11B, 5.12B
Ric Bessin – Fig. 5.8A
Nicole Ward Gauthier – Fig. 5.3B-C, 5.4A, 5.9A-D, 5.10B-C
John Hartman – Fig. 5.3D, 5.8C, 5.15
Cheryl Kaiser – Fig. 5.5C, 5.12C
Brenda Kennedy – Fig. 5.12D
Kimberly Leonberger – Fig. 5.4C
William Nesmith – Fig. 5.8B
Steve Osborne – Fig. 5.8D
Kenneth Seebold – Fig. 5.2C-D, 5.6B-D, 5.7A-C, 5.8D
University of Maine
Bruce Watt, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.13A
University of Tennessee Extension
Alan Windham – Fig. 5.10D, 5.13D
USDA Agricultural Research Service
Scott Bauer, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.7D
USDA Forest Service
Joseph OBrien, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.5A
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Elizabeth Bush, Bugwood.org – Fig. 5.4B
Revised 01-2024